#gamedev is afraid

As an industry, you see a lot of fear right now. That fear is fear of change. And more to the point, it's really the fear of the success of games. Games no longer belong to a misfit culture of underdogs. And a lot of people don't know what to do when they're not the underdog any longer.

Gamedev, insecure teenage years, establishing place in the world

e.g. Arcades

#gamedev needs a (big) vision

We should be aiming higher as an industry. Whatever your goals are:

If your goal is to make a great game, know what that means.

* Uncompomising expression of your artistic vision? 
* Fantastic diversion for a niche crowd?
* Making the time pass on the toilet a little bit faster for millions of people?
* Reach the widest audience? Make the most money? 

If your goal is to say something to the world,
not accidentally chosen a profession with an engaged audience; interact through proxy

* Want to make a difference (not a power you are given) 
* What do we do? Transform lives, companies, industries, cultures, ourselves. 
* Want to challenge hearts and minds. (simple diversion; much more. Explore ideas, creativity, fantasies. Teach.) 
* Want to leave a footprint. Not be forgotten. No be irrelevant.

#gamedev is resistant to change

Enemy: Fear. Resistance to change. Compacency. 

Falling behind
Not adapting

#gamdev pushes forward with or without you

Signs:

* Indie explosion. I would venture to guess that more independent games have been made in the last three years than in the last 25 years combined. Or close to that anyway. Just a few short years ago, everyone was sure that it was the end of indie games. But instead what we've seen is an absolute explosion of indies! Everywhere there is an ecosystem that can support independent game development, it exists. And is on fire! iOS development is the obvious example. 

* Serious games. An area that's finally caught some momentum. Fundamentally, people now actually believe (rightly) that using games to teach and to learn about the world around us is one of the most effective methods we have at our disposal. We've just seen the beginning, but you can't speak seriously about the future of education and training without considering how games will play a significant, if not the most significant, part in that.
Social and mobile. There's been a tendency to look at the success of games in the social and mobile spaces completely backward in my opinion. Conflating the success of a particular type of game or genre of game with the space or platform. The real transformation is not "social games" or "mobile games" (which are fairly meaningless descriptions), but rather the success of games in new spaces.  The recognition of both a wider appeal beyond the traditional "core" audience and a reflection of the world that we live in. Games are simply and inevitably wherever people are.

* Gamification. There is some debate over the word itself (much disliked among certain gamedevs) and the use of certain "techniques" like pointsification and friendsploitation (See also: exploitionware and alternatively, gameful design). But there is no question that whatever you call it, and whether or not you understand it fully or use it appropriately, games have been recognized for their ability to make a difference in the way people see and interact with the world. Whether used for marketing a product, engaging people in activities they'd otherwise find boring or distasteful, or simply adding a bit of fun to something, the lessons we've learned in developing games are powerful and useful tools.

* Change the world. If anything makes it obvious that games have leveled up, it's the belief that games can change the world. But not just in a happy fucking Pollyanna way, either. Games can help give people insight into their world; Games don't have to make light or fun of big problems that we need to solve as people. We have started to see them as a tool to humanize issues. Actively, interactively, engaging and learning about  issues like war, violence, loss, tragedy, poverty, clean water, etc. can put things into perspective and give people real tools to make real change.

But all of these things are  just symptoms of change. The real change in games is their success. Video games have become an accepted and integral part of our collective culture.

Copy success of others?

#gamedev has won

No choice
Transformative time
Cannot predict
Set sights too low, not misfits/outsiders; battle fought and won; firmly established in collective culture

#gamedev sets its sights on the obvious

Embrace possibilities
Gamedev, leading change from individuals and respective positions


#gamdev is more than merely adapting

Real problem is self

Not being relevent
Gaming era; make sense of the world
More than merely adapting; reflect culture.

#gamedev is growing (really, really big)

Makers of games; every company will look to you for advice, direction and experience

The art of gamedev is embracing change.
Embrace and be catalysts for change
Most important keyword: growth

Growth as an industry
Growth as a collective
Growth as individuals

#gamedev is mindful

Lesson: More than ever before, we can each do something. Voice should be heard.
Out not to leave our collective destiny to others
More important than ever to be mindful of why we are here and why we do what we do.



